# Overview of python-sibilant

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/obriencj/python-sibilant.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/obriencj/python-sibilant)

Sibilant is a dialect of [LISP] which compiles to [Python] bytecode.

Sibilant is not done. It's still being organically grown in bars and
coffee shops whenever I get a chance to sit alone. I will eventually
get to the point where it seems like a 1.0.0 is sane. Until then, this
is version 0.9.0 and every commit or pull-request could introduce
dramatic changes.

[LISP]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_(programming_language)

[Python]: https://python.org/


## But Why?

Mostly "why not," and "I do what I want," with some "[for myself],"
mixed in.

[for myself]: http://obriencj.preoccupied.net/blog/2017/09/17/my-first-lisp-compiler/

But also because I really love the idea of domain-specific languages.
Every single time I wrote a block of configuration for optparse or
argparse I yearned for defmacro. Whenever I created structured
unpacking of data, I wanted to just define the shapes and let those be
transformed into a parser and object model.


## Origins

This was a project begun in 2007 and subsequently left abaondoned in
early 2008.

I believe the concept grew out of my hacking with the absurdity that
is [Spexy]. But while Spexy was mostly a joke and a puzzle, Sibilant
had a goal to create a working and sane-ish LISP compiler.

I wasn't ready for such an undertaking, and a great deal of Real Life
took up my time instead. The modest first passes as Sibilant sat
mostly forgotten in a CVS repo.

[Spexy]: https://github.com/obriencj/python-spexy
"A hackish, LISP-like preprocessor for Python"

Some time in January of 2014 I ran across my checkout. The upstream
`cvsroot` had disappeared -- it was on a host that had probably been
migrated, and I'd not bothered to bring along these repos, or I did a
really good job hiding it from myself. I imported what I had left to
GitHub for posterity, unsure of the fate of the project.

For the next few years I would idly poke at bits here and there. I
toyed with different ideas for some of the basic data types, but never
got anywhere serious.

Then suddenly in July of 2017 I went nuts and threw together the
compiler in a week while drinking at a [barcade].

[barcade]: https://theboxcarbar.com/raleigh/

It has been a fantastic learning experience, and excellent mental
exercise. While the Sibilant user base might always number in just the
single digits, I can never consider the project a failure. The sheer
joy from when a particular feature comes to life for the first time,
or the satisfaction of seeing the language develop are enough to merit
declaring it a success. I am excited to continue hacking at it, what
more is there?


## Python Version Support

CPython 3.5 and 3.6 are currently supported. Sibilant outputs python
bytecode directly, and creates code, function, and module instances
from there. The Python 3 line has changed its bytecode quite a bit
between these two minor versions. It's possible that earlier versions
of Python 3 could also be supported, but there are some that the
sibilant implementation uses which would need to be changed. It's a
low priority currently, but I'm definitely open to pull requests on
that front if someone really needs 3.4 support.

[PyPy3] is [being considered], but a very key piece of necessary
functionality (the ability to specify a custom `builtins` module) is
[disabled] by [default] as an optimization.

[PyPy3]: https://pypy.org/

[being considered]: https://github.com/obriencj/python-sibilant/issues/51

[disabled]: https://bitbucket.org/pypy/pypy/issues/2653/

[default]: http://doc.pypy.org/en/latest/config/objspace.honor__builtins__.html


## References

Sibilant targets Python bytecode directly. I rely heavily on the
auto-generated documentation for the `dis` module, and on its output
for seeing just what the default compiler would do for some cases.

* [Module `dis` in Python 3.6](https://docs.python.org/3.6/library/dis.html)
* [Module `dis` in Python 3.5](https://docs.python.org/3.5/library/dis.html)


## Features

Sibilant is slowly growing as more special forms and macros are
added. Below are a few of the key features


### Importer

Python 3 provides an extensible import system via `importlib`. When
the `sibilant` module is loaded, this system will be extended
to support treating sibilant source files (files found in `sys.path`
and ending in `.lspy` or `.sibilant`) as packages or modules.

In other words, to enable loading of sibilant code at runtime, you
just need to have `import sibilant` at the beginning of your
top-level module.

From within a sibilant module the `import` function allows fetching a
module from the importer. `def import` and `def import-from` will bind
modules or their contents.


### Compile to File

Sibilant has the ability to compile a `.lspy` file into a `.pyc` which
can then be loaded by the default importer. Modules loaded in this
manner skip the parse and compile stages, but still execute in-order
during load. These modules have a hard dependency on sibilant -- they
are not stand-alone. All of the sibilant types are pulled in
dynamically.


### Line Numbers

A big advantage of sibilant over an interpreted lisp using a lambda
emitter in Python is that the bytecode sibilant emits can have a
line-number-table associated with it. This means that exceptions or
tracebacks will interleave between python source code and sibilant
source code, and correctly show the line that the raise came from.


### Tail-call optimization

The Sibilant compiler implements simple tail-call optimization via a
trampoline. The trampoline will bounce tail-calls out of the calling
frame where they will be evaluated, consuming no additional stack
space. This form of TCO does have the somewhat frustrating side-effect
of collapsing the call stack, which can make tracebacks difficult to
debug. Sibilant will only perform TCO on calls to functions written
with TCO enabled -- ie. Python function calls won't get bounced unless
they were explicitly created with the sibilant `@trampoline`
decorator.


### Parse-time Macros: reader macros

Parse time macros defined via `set-macro-character` can transform
the source stream before it becomes a source object


### Compile-time Macros: defmacro

Compile time macros defined via `defmacro` are the simple, low-level
variety, transforming the `cons` list from the parsed source code and
emitting a new list representing the expanded form. An implementation
of `macroexpand-1` is included for macro debugging purposes.

Macros which expand from a `symbol` rather than a `cons` list can be
created via `defalias`. Alias macros take no arguments.


### Compile-time optimized operators

The common Python operators and comparators are implemented such that
they have both a compile-time and run-time representation. Where
possible, operators will compile to direct bytecode operations, but
can also be passed and called as runtime functions.


### try/except/else/finally

The `try` special form can be used as an expression, evaluating to the
block that runs last.


### the context manager interface

The `with` special form can be used to enter a context manager and
bind the result locally, then clean up once execution of the inner
form ends. The expression evaluates to the last value of the body.


### Looping

The `while` and `for-each` forms can be used to repeatedly execute a
body of code. The `break` and `continue` forms can be used from within
those blocks as well.


### Generators

Sibilant can create generators from `function`, `lambda`, and `let`
forms, by using either the `yield` or `yield-from` expressions.


### Future Feature: Rewrite Sibilant in Sibilant

I'd like to get to the point where I can rewrite the compiler
subpackage in sibilant itself. Then compile the new compiler in the
old compiler, and finally re-compile the new compiler using itself.

The sibilant compiler will eventually become sibilantzero, to be
relegated to a simple build dependency in producing sibilant proper.


## Should You Use Sibilant?

Probably not. Instead you should almost certainly use a well-defined
and maintained Lisp or Scheme from the beginning.  Here's some really
great ones:

* Chez Scheme - <https://www.scheme.com/>
* Guile - <https://www.gnu.org/software/guile/>
* Racket - <https://racket-lang.org>
* Clojure - <https://clojure.org>

However if you're really stuck to an existing Python environment, you
just might enjoying giving Sibilant a shot. [Let me know] your cool
use-case!

[let me know]: https://github.com/obriencj/python-sibilant/issues


## Contact

Author: Christopher O'Brien  <obriencj@gmail.com>

IRC Channel: #python-sibilant on [Freenode]

Original Git Repository: <https://github.com/obriencj/python-sibilant>

[Freenode]: https://freenode.net


## License

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this library; if not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
